[Music]
Hey yo, Red Man is in the building. You
already know. I got a special
announcement. I had to pull my car over
for this [__] right here. Now, we all
know SEO week is starting off right now.
I hope I'm saying that right. Seo co.
I'mma just go with sale week is starting
off right now and y'all hanging with my
boy Buster at the afterparty. That's
going to be lit. Yo, Bust, what the [__]
is up? Um, but we ain't talking
algorithms and backlinks without
bringing out the king of the ranks. The
king of the rank. This dude is a lyrical
tech wizard in the SEO game. You already
know. turning data into dominance,
search into strategy, and yeah, he's
even most nicer on the mic than most.
All right, without further ado, all
right, I need y'all to put your hands
together and make some noise for the IPO
rank CEO, the one and only, that
[__]
Mike King. Mike King, what the [__] is
up?
Let's go. Let's go. Say your week. You
already know it's time to level up. Time
to level up. And who's going to bring
you to that level? My boy Mike King.
Mike King. Let's get it. Everybody say
your weak. Let's get it. Time to level
the [__] up. And then after that, we all
go smoke some weed.
>> Make some noise, y'all.
I'm Mike King and this is SEO week.
[Music]
>> Where' my music go?
>> So, welcome to SEO week. My name is Mike
King and I'm really excited for all of
y'all to be here and there is so much
for us to talk about today and uh yeah,
let's just get into it. Is that all
right with y'all?
>> Cool. All right, so welcome to SEO week.
Like I said before, brought to you by
the greatest SEO company in the world,
Ipool Rank. And uh so how did this all
happened? About a year ago, there was a
random week of events for SEO after New
York not having anything for like six
years. And I was like, "Hey guys, we
should make it SEO week next year." And
here we are. So, thanks for coming.
Really appreciate it. Um, I don't know
if there's a Yeah, there's a bit of
delay there. Next slide,
Jimmy.
So, thank you to all of our sponsors as
well. Uh, you know, we couldn't do this
without them. So, you know, we've got
Last Mile Retail, Yex, Ma Stat,
Previsible, Screaming Frog, Aerops,
Similar Web, Profound, Conductor, and of
course, I pull Rank because we paid for
most of this.
Uh, thank you to all of our speakers as
well. You know, I've got 40 of the best
speakers in this space. Some folks you
may have never heard of from before, but
they've got so much good stuff to say
for y'all over the next four days. So,
also, I want to thank all of the
attendees. We've got people from 21
countries in this room.
That's crazy.
We got 232 different companies
represented in this room and we got
people that are 100% ready to take
search to the next level. And also,
we've got a lot of IPR clients here and
we our abbreviation is IPR. A lot of
people say like Ipool or whatever, which
is so weird to me. It's IPR. Anyway,
we've got a lot of IPO ranked clients in
the room. So, you know, you can talk to
them about what it's like to be a
winner, too.
Y'all almost gave me a heart attack,
though. So, these are our ticket sales
over time. The first three months, we
sold very few tickets. And as you can
tell, this is a very expensive
production, and there was a lot more I
wanted to do, but I was like, I don't
think anybody's coming.
I'm about to put put together the best
show ever, and nobody's going to come.
And we we we're like six weeks out. I
was like, "Yo, I think I could get
Buster Rhymes, y'all." But I'mma throw a
Buster Rhyme show and nobody's going to
come. So, in the last couple weeks,
that's when all the ticket sales started
to happen. And in fact, we've gotten
like it was like 30 so people that have
hit us up in the last like 24 hours
saying, "Can I get a ticket?" You can't
cuz we sold out.
I'm going say something that you will
never hear another New Yorker say ever.
Go check out Times Square
>> because we have a welcome ad for you
guys. I'd love for you to take pictures
in front of it, tag it with uh with SEO
week, and then, you know, get it on your
internets. So, what exactly did you get
yourself into? Well, I'll tell you. Day
one is the science. We've got theme days
here. You're going to hear all the
technical stuff that you really wish you
knew about SEO, probably more than you
want from some of the greatest minds in
the space. Some folks you've never seen
before, like I said. And then tonight we
have our welcome swore this which is um
sponsored by Last Mile Retail in this
room or in this building. Uh tomorrow we
have the psychology where we'll be
talking a lot about like how you need to
be thinking about SEO moving forward and
also how users are thinking about search
moving forward. And then we have our SEO
week after dark. These are our meetups
at night that are sponsored by
Demandphere. They have one where they've
got uh Zach Chahalis, uh Jory Ford and
Ian Lori that'll be speaking. And then
you've also got in the same evening. You
have choices effectively uh SEO week
after dark which is SEO FOMO from Ala
and sponsored by the conductor team. So
as I understand that one may already be
overs subscribed. So definitely check
out the demands fair one. I'll be at
both and we'll have a lot to talk about.
Now Wednesday
we're talking about what's this the
ecosystem. Yeah we're talking about um
you know all the different types of
search. So things like local search,
video search, e-commerce, and so on. And
again, we're still thinking about like
what do users need to be thinking about
this as well. And then we have our
afterparty,
which of course is starring Buster
Rhymes. And I'll be rapping too if
that's okay with y'all. And I got some
other friends that are coming too.
And then the last day is the future.
We're talking about the future of
search. Where are things going? How do
we account for it?
So, some quick housekeeping things. One,
SEO week is a hashtag. Two, there's also
a Slack channel. If you haven't joined
it already, please do. That's where you
get the most up-to-date information. We
have a code of conduct. Don't be an
[__]
Just had to boil it down for you. Uh,
and there's also no Q&A during the
sessions or after the session. So, grab
the speakers when you see them. They'll
be floating around. So, what's new with
Apple Rank? I can't throw a conference
and not tell you about what we're doing,
right? So, um, uh, oh, I went too far on
that one.
So, we got a new website which should
have just launched this morning and it's
a lot cooler.
It uh, reflects who we actually are. You
know, the website that we had was like I
don't know, it's not as bad as like a
Bruce Clay website, but it was pretty
bad.
Yo, why does that join look like Windows
98?
Anyway, so we've got a lot of really
cool features on our website. It's
really fast. We've used some things that
Jonno Alderson was talking about like
edge images. We've improved our b our
brand positioning. We've got uh it's
like static WordPress on Cloudflare.
There's no third party scripts. It's
amazing. It's incredible. Go look at it
and buy stuff from us. Uh so here's
where we are. This is our knowledge
graph which is representing what Ipore
rank is at this point. You know, we do
SEO, content strategy, and generative
AI, of course. And like I said, we're
the best agency for this sort of work.
And this is our team or a lot of our
team. Some of them are here. Team, make
some noise, y'all.
>> Our team is amazing. You should get to
know them while you're here because like
I said, they're amazing. Just keep
looking at them. They look great.
>> So, um, you know, we're hiring. So if
anyone is looking to join the best team
in the world, feel free. Uh we're hiring
for SEO director, SEO engineer,
marketing data scientists, and also a
sales development representative.
So in addition to that, um
you should be a client if you're not.
We would love to work with you and we're
very excited that you are here.
So, I want to introduce our first
speaker, me.
Let's talk about the brave new world of
SEO.
Um, like I said, so much to talk about
here. So, let's just get into it.
All right. So, search is at an
inflection point. What do I mean by
that? Well, let's look at this. So, if
you recall,
search started out very much before
Google. It was really bad. It was all
about like how do I shove in these
keywords as many times as possible and
whoever used the keyword the most was
the one that ranked. And then Google
popped up, changed the game. They
introduced page rank and at that point
we had our whole like 10 blue link
situation
and
search was really easy. It was like,
cool, how do I find these links and get
as many of those and then beat everyone
from doing that, right? And then things
have continued to evolve, of course. So,
we got to a point where Google has
knowledge graphs. They can understand
the people, places, and things on the
web. And then after that, they moved
into the transformer. I know I'm
skipping things, but I'm giving you the
most important things to what we're
talking about today. That's how they can
better understand the context of the
words being used. And then we have EAT.
This order is very specific because EAT
is not about author profiles and we're
going to talk about that. Now we got AI
overviews which is of course changing
how people interact with search. And
then finally you've also got chat GPT
which is now conversational search. So
this is where we are and effectively
users have so many places that they can
be going. It's not just that they they
go to Google, they can go to Tik Tok,
they can go to any other channel and use
it as a search surface. I'm getting hot
up here.
[Applause]
>> $3,000 code on the on the floor. But
let's face it, your organic search
traffic is not coming back. It's
something that we're all kind of like
talking about amongst ourselves, but
people are like fearful to be like, "Yo,
the traffic is going down." They think
they're doing something wrong. They
don't want people to know that their
traffic is going down. But we're seeing
this across the board, right? What
you're seeing in this this uh chart here
is the traffic for Wikipedia over time.
And so what you would have expected is
that when Chat GBT came out that they
would have lost traffic very quickly.
That's not true. the trend of traffic
after chatb actually went up probably as
a result of people feeling the need to
verify information that they're getting
because everyone knows things
hallucinate. But what you notice here on
that second line on that chart is that
when AI overviews came out, Wikipedia's
traffic started to trend downward. So
it's not just you, it's happening across
the web. So what we're also seeing this
is data from similar web is that um you
know the activity in Google has gone up
more pages per visit in Google
specifically around the time the AI
overviews rolled out. So when you hear
things like Sundar saying like, "Hey,
there's more and more people searching
on Google. It's much better." And so on,
that is actually true. Users are
spending more time looking at more
pages. And so we're also seeing, you
know, this is like another pretty big,
really well-loved content site seeing
the same thing. So again, it's not just
you, it's the whole web that's seeing
things start to go down and it's not
coming back. So, you need to change your
mindset about what success is in search.
And I know that um Bianca is going to
talk about this as well, but on this
next slide here, um we're we're showing
that this is the the chart that
everyone's seen around HubSpot and its
performance, right? So, everyone's like,
"Oh, algorithm update, algorithm
update." What they missed out on is the
fact that there's a pretty steep drop
right there that happened when AI
overviews launched. So again, there's a
big picture thing happening as a result
of what Google is changing.
So unless you're monetizing on
impressions or ad impressions rather,
was traffic ever the measure? Like why
are we always measuring on that when
businesses are trying to do specific
things? So in this next slide,
excuse me, I talk about where Google is
going. Google has always been thinking
about this from a perspective of what is
best for the user. And there was a paper
that came out a couple years ago by a
gentleman named Andre Broer. You may not
know who that is, but you know his work.
If you've ever used the taxonomy of
navigational, informationational,
transactional, that's Andre Broers's
work. In this paper, he it talks about
uh the delicate cost of web search. He
talks about there being a cognitive cost
involved in searching. And think about
it. You've got to first take your
information need, convert it into
Orwellian newsspeak, put it in Google,
review 10 links, and then also look at
all these other SER features which are
all coming at your attention. And then
you got to make sense of all that. Go
through a bunch of results to get your
answer. Google is like, nah, that's not
a good experience for users. How do we
put that answer right in front of you?
So, of course, that's what we're getting
with AI overviews. They are summarizing
that information and putting it in front
of you. And so so many users are like,
"Cool, I'm reading through this. I don't
have to click through anything, but they
perform subsequent searches." And then
when they're at that point where they're
like, "Cool, I've read everything I need
to know. I want to make a transaction. I
want to uh, you know, get more
information." At that point, they're
clicking through and they're a more
educated or more qualified visitor. At
that point, that's why we're seeing that
the relationship between traffic and
conversions is no longer linear. you're
seeing a lot more people that are
converting but a lot less people that
are visiting the site. AI mode is the
natural next step of that. If you've
heard of deep research which is you know
popping up across all the different
conversational surfaces now um they're
bringing deep research effectively to
the SER. At that point we're talking
about reasoning and all these other
things that kind of mix up what's going
to be ultimately shown to the user. So
you have far less control there. Google
is also training users for longer
queries. So if you there was a a news
article about this a couple days ago
where they showed that the search box
has gotten longer because effectively
they can better understand your queries
from a natural language perspective.
There was a demo about a year ago where
they showed something called the bespoke
UI. And in that video, this gentleman
was like going through trying to figure
out how to uh start a or organize a
party for his kid's birthday. And the
interface was directly related to what
it is that that person was doing. It was
not your typical 10 blue links. So this
is where Google may be ultimately going.
And then once you start talking about
agents and and agentic AI and so on,
that's where we're talking about the
abstraction of the user is just
completely different. there is something
that's going out there trying to
represent you and get that information
without you even being in that loop. So,
the funny thing to me is that SEO keeps
trying to minimize this moment. SEO
keeps trying to say like, "Oh, it's just
SEO. It's just SEO." You know, it's not
a situation where things need to be
different.
I don't understand.
like I don't understand why you guys
want to keep being this. And when I say
this, it's effectively like the people
on the internet that don't get any real
credit, aren't really respected, aren't
really getting the value for what it is
that they do. And so there's a concept
behind this. This idea is called schema
preservation. It's when new information
comes in and you're like, "No, no, no,
no. It's not new. It's the same as
this." And people do this out of fear.
People do this because they don't
understand the situation that they're in
and they just want to like basically
mitigate everything by saying like, "Oh
yeah, it's just like the thing that I
know, right?" Just like when the leaked
documents came out and everyone's like,
"Oh, I already knew all that." No, you
didn't.
The [__] out of here.
So right now about 85% of the results in
AI overviews are coming directly from
the SER right now. That's the important
idea to remember here. Um that's not
necessarily always going to be true,
right? So on this next slide, I got this
um screenshot from Reddit where the CEO
of Perplexity was like, "Oh yeah, I
don't know what you're going to do about
SEO once all this reasoning and stuff
happens."
This technology is evolving so quickly.
Just because AI overviews overlap
heavily with the SER right now and you
can still manipulate the SER in very
similar ways that you've done in the
past does not mean it's going to remain
this way going forward. This is a
platform shift. They have the agent to
agent protocol. They have the model
context protocol where effectively
you're going to be able to plug this
stuff into any system. You're going to
be pulling data from all these different
places. SEO as it stands is not ready
for this.
There's another aspect here where
there's going to be a lot of
hyperpersonalization as these memory
functions come out. So with chat GBT and
also with Gemini now they're able to
remember your conversations over time.
When that comes to search that's a level
of personalization where the results are
going to effectively be onetoone based
on that user context. When we talked
about personalization in the past my
kids are here. This is cool. Hey Zora.
Um
um yeah, that's cool. Um so yeah, with
memory features, things are going to be
one to one. It's going to be very
difficult for you to slot yourself in
there. And this is exactly why we're not
ready because we don't understand these
technologies. We don't understand the
underpinnings of all this stuff. And
that's why this day is very much about
these underpinnings. Let's talk about
the limitations of the SEO space. So
what is SEO?
It's a whole bunch of [__] that we put
in a box and started claiming ownership
over. SEO actually should not exist. SEO
is a function of the fact that all these
other capabilities and disciplines don't
think about requirements for Google. So
suddenly we start doing everything when
they say like hey core web vitals we are
now perform performance engineers. Did
we did anybody get any more money for
becoming a performance engineer? I just
want to, you know, be clear on that. So,
I feel like SEO is in its third
generation. Like 97 to07, I call that
like boomer SEO. That's like
that's like Danny Sullivan, Bruce Clay,
you know what I mean? Where they are the
ones who we we they set the foundation.
They built what we're standing on. But
one of the main things that they did
wrong was call this channel free
traffic. And then we had Gen X SEO which
is like Rand and Will Reynolds and so
on. They tried to level things up
dramatically. They tried to bring a lot
more scientific rigor into this space.
And then we've got millennial SEO which
is like Alita and Lily me. And we are
actively changing things, right? But
there's a lot of push back from the old
heads. What's next is probably going to
be Gen Z SEO. And you know how Gen Z is.
They're not going to allow anything that
doesn't make sense. So, I'm trying to do
my best to leave something good for them
to take over. Here's some challenges in
SEO. We don't think big picture at all.
The things that we can be doing with the
information and data that we have could
change businesses. Instead, we're just
talking about content links and 301
redirects. I know a guy who used to work
at um uh Deutsch or one of those
agencies. He worked on HTC and he used
uh search data, search volume data to
prove to them that HTC should have
phones and colors that are not just
black, white, and gray.
That is big picture thinking for SEO. We
don't do enough of that. Our software is
obsolete. Frankly, most of what SEO
software does is on a model that Google
kind of still uses. And what I mean by
that, there's effectively two different
models of search. There's lexical where
you're just basically counting the
presence and distribution rates of words
and then there's semantic where you're
effectively understanding meaning.
Almost all SEO software is still on that
on that lexical model which doesn't make
sense. So a lot of the information that
you're acting on is not right.
There's a ton of misinformation in our
space too. I mean I mentioned EAT
earlier. It's not about author profiles,
but for some reason everyone in this
room thinks it's about author profiles.
We're going to talk about that. And then
also the value is just very much
misunderstood in our space. We are the
biggest referral channel on the
internet. We get paid the least. Make it
make sense.
So this myth of free traffic is
something that we need to let go of. You
know, there's another channel out there
or series of channels out there that are
governed by algorithms and you need
content to play in them and the traffic
is free.
Social media. Nobody is selling them to
do projections. Nobody is questioning
whether or not it's going to work.
They're just like, "Hey, it's social.
Let's just put some things out. Spend a
$100,000 on it and see what happens."
But in our space, we got to jump through
all these holes because it's free
traffic.
Search has also always been a brand
channel and it's a disservice that we
consider ourselves a performance
channel. Brand has a much bigger budget
than performance. Brand is able to take
more risks and bigger swings. But we are
always like, "Oh, well, it's zero click.
We're losing our traffic. What are we
going to do?" No. People seeing you in a
featured snippet or an AI overview and
taking an action is valuable.
We need to take credit for that. You
need to take credit for impressions.
That is valuable.
SEO also has no standards. That's why I
can talk to every single person in this
room and ask them what they do. Like,
what do you do in your day-to-day for
SEO? You will all give me a different
answer
because there are no standards. There's
no common set of education that we all
have. We all kind of do different
subsets of the same thing. And SEO has
actually made the internet worse. This
was proven by a series of researchers,
academics out in Germany. They did a
longitudinal study over a year and they
proved that SEO is making the web worse.
So, our reputation is awful.
Google's been doing hybrid search for a
long time. I mentioned that idea of
lexical and semantic. They do both.
Semantic probably the dial is up a bit
more because there's a lot more value in
there from an AI perspective. But again,
the way that we operate in SEO is just
on that lexical model. So again, most of
our SEO software is obsolete.
There's also this myth that generative
AI content just because it's generative
AI content gets you penalized. That is
not true. You cannot use that as a
single signal in isolation to indicate
whether or not content is good. Instead,
what Google does, they use all the
signals that they typically use, things
like user interactions and so on. And
this is also further proven that they
can't do it because now they are asking
quality raiders to tell them which means
they're trying to train new classifiers
around it. So generative AI content is
fine. It just has to be good.
EAT was never about author bios. EAT is
how Google it's an abstraction. It's
Google saying like hey we do all these
things with these goals and we're
actually able to do these on the back of
vector embeddings. So they're able to
generate vector embeddings for entities,
vector embeddings for authors, vector
embeddings for websites to understand
the relationships with that topology of
the web. So do y'all really want to stay
the janitors of the web?
Because AI
like this is our moment. This is our
moment to really stand up and be
something different. If you want to just
keep being the janitor of the web, keep
saying like, "Oh, it's just SEO. It's
just SEO." Even if it is just SEO, the
framing is different. We can redefine
what this is.
So remember that time when Google used
us to make the web faster.
They were like, "Hey guys, you're going
to get a rankings boost. You just go out
and make the websites faster." It
actually happened. We saved Google
billions of dollars from crawling the
web because we ran out to do their dirty
work for for them.
Really being an SEO
is being a power user of Google. I'm not
an SEO. I do something different.
And you probably do too. You just aren't
calling it something different. So
what's the most important thing that I
want you guys to understand? It is the
idea of vector embeddings because this
is what has transformed
search engines ability to do what they
do. And effectively what you're doing is
you're taking words and then you're
converting them to coordinates in
multi-dimensional space and then you can
do a variety of different linear algebra
um operations to understand the
relationships between things. So
um really those operations look like
this. You're doing what's called cosine
similarity. There's a variety of ways to
do it but cosine similarity dotproduct.
These are the most um what are the words
popular ways to do it right?
Go back.
So with um if you have a cosine
similarity that's close to one that
means it's highly related. If you have a
cosine similarity that's close to zero
that means it's orthogonal or not
related and if you have a cosine
similarity that is uh close to negative
1 that means it's opposite. So these are
the operations where we're determining
relevance. It's really the measurement
between angles in these vectors. So when
we talk about relevance it's not this
qualitative idea where it's like hey I
read this I feel like it's more
relevant. It is a mathematical idea. So
let's take you into the algorithm. Let's
go to vector space.
So this is effectively what Google is
doing. They're taking your queries,
they're plotting them in space. In this
case, we've got travel points, we've got
credit card rewards. These are close
together. So because they're relevant
cash back bonus, these are all relevant
ideas to each other. So they're
physically closer in space. And then you
got airline miles. Another one. The
concept very similar. So, it's plotted
very closely, right? Then if we go a lot
further, a lot further. Okay, right
there you got credit cards. That makes
sense. But if we go further, keep going,
keep going. Dog leash, that's not
related. You see how long it took us to
get there? That's because it's not
relevant to those other subjects. So,
when you put something on your website
that's not related to everything else,
you have this thing that's floating in
space that doesn't make sense. And
they're like, why is this here? They can
see this easily from the topology of the
web. So ultimately what they're doing is
they're clustering all this across the
web. They can understand when you're
doing something wrong. And this I'm just
showing you this with keywords. They do
this with entities. They do this with
authors. They do this with websites.
They're able to see like the similarity
is not very close on those, but it's
very close on those things down there. I
don't know why we put that back there.
Sorry about that. But whole point is
that when these when you zoom out you
can easily see like okay all this stuff
is related. These things are orbiting
the same space. So Google is very
capable of understanding where your
topics live. Understanding that an
author writes on these subjects and
they're an expert because they are very
well clustered together. But when you
start doing random things or you start
building links from pages that don't
make sense, it is trivial for them to
understand that. And in SEO, we trick
ourselves into believing like, "Oh yeah,
I can get links from anywhere. It
doesn't matter. They don't have to be
relevant." No. That's why your link
building doesn't work because you're not
doing what they're looking for. In this
case, it's really easy for you to say,
"Okay, these topics go together. They're
close." So it's very easy to understand
what those relationships are. So this is
what we're doing. We are effectively
engineering relevance if you're doing
SEO the right way.
Um lots of use cases for these vector
embeddings. So one content engineering
making content that fits into the
expectations of Google. Uh calculating
your relevance so you can use those same
scores that Google is doing. Building
better internal linking clustering your
content better. There's a lot that we
can be doing with this. What SEO tool
does any of this stuff? Anybody?
Exactly. Because our tools are obsolete.
So, this is engineering. This is not
optimization. Optimization is like being
a car mechanic. You're like, "Oh, yeah.
I'm just going to fix this radio. I'm
going to make your car go a little
faster." We are building cars here. We
are not fixing cars.
What I do is called relevance
engineering. You don't have to call your
stuff that. I'm gonna call my stuff that
and I'm actually a lot cooler than you.
I'm kidding. I'm kidding. Um, so
relevance engineering is really the
confluence of artificial intelligence,
um, content strategy, information
retrieval, not SEO. SEO is an abstract.
Information retrieval is the science by
how you get things ranked. It's also
user experience and uh, digital PR.
So yeah, it sounds like SEO, but it's a
broader scope because we are looking for
something that is far more in-depth here
and it encompasses all versions of
search. Whatever search surface you're
trying to optimize for, this is
relevance engineering. So whether
that's, you know, conversational search,
Amazon search, Google search, and the
main difference is that SEO is a
checklist culture. Think about your
audits. you have some sort of checklist
that you go through every time. You're
missing a lot of stuff because you're
just like, "Oh yeah, the best practice
is say this." How many times have you
said to someone like, "Oh, your page
title is supposed to be 60 to 70
characters."
That's wrong. That's a best practice
that was established at one point and
was just never reconsidered.
Every time we have appended the top
three keywords from uh Google Search
Console for a given page to the end of
the page title, clickthrough rates go up
or not clickthrough rates, clicks go up
20%.
That's not a best practice. If you
looked at that, you'd be like, "Oh, I
for rank doesn't know what they're
doing. They're not following best
practices because they don't work." And
we need to be continually testing that,
not just following checklists. So, how
does it differ from SEO? One, it defines
itself. SEO has largely been defined by
Google. Google tells us what's right,
what's wrong, what we can do, what we
can't. That doesn't make any sense. We
need to define that. We need to say what
the best practices are. We need to say
what we cover. It also requires or
features technical rigor, scientific and
technical rigor, because there's a lot
of people in our space that will get up
on the stage and be like, "Oh, this is
what it is anecdotally because you saw
it on one website. We need to level up
and hold ourselves to a higher standard.
And it also operates self-sufficiently.
You don't need to go out to other teams
to be effective. You should be able to
do these things yourself. You shouldn't
be at the whim of like, oh, well, the
engineering team only has five tickets
this week. No, you should be able to
have someone on your team that can step
in and be like, here's how we're going
to fix this. That's relevance
engineering. So, where it really starts
is like, okay, how do we identify
relevant audiences?
And if you've been following me for a
long time, what I'm talking about is
personas. Who are the people that we're
looking to talk to? How do we reach
them? What keywords are they looking
for? Or if it's not keywords, what
conversations are they having? And then
which channels do we want to actually be
in? Is it chatb? Is it Google? Where is
it? Then we need to configure the
platforms.
Are things actually set up to be
accessible by these systems? And then
you want to create relevant experiences.
Now, we're talking about content
strategy. We're not talking about
content marketing because you can just
create a piece of content, throw it up,
and you've done content marketing, but
I'm talking about building content
experiences, building systems so that we
can be effective in doing this stuff
over and over. And then it's about
developing co-relevant experiences. So
you could say link building, you could
say digital PR, but I'm saying I want to
be mentioned and I want to be linked
from sites that actually matter to what
it is that I'm talking about that are
very relevant. And then ultimately,
you're measuring performance. So what
are the tenants here? One, technical
standards. We are going to establish a
series of technical standards that we
all adhere to. We're going to scrutinize
our best practices. We're not going to
just keep saying like, oh yeah, 60 70
characters for page titles. we are going
to collectively test this over and over
and then share that information to say
like hey here's the up totheminute
situation and then building
experimentation frameworks AB testing a
lot of people think this is optional in
our space you absolutely need to be
doing this no matter the size of your
site I don't care if you don't have
enough pages that fit the same uh
similar you know template or whatever
you need to be AB testing as much as you
can and
reproducibility reproducibility rather
um you know and peer review. We're going
to have people that are going to be and
when I say we, I don't mean I rank. I
mean the community that are going to be
peer reviewing things so that we can
have things that we can say this is the
gold standard. This is real. This has
been looked at. We've looked at the data
and we've reproduced these results
and open-source software. We can't rely
on the SEO software industrial complex.
They are not they are not well the
people in the room are actually pretty
good but they are not
incentivized to do this the right way.
They are incentivized to give you some
sort of simple score that may or may not
represent reality and then you just
optimize towards that score and that
score does nothing for you. So, we're
going to build open-source software that
we can all use and we can get the data
that we need because there needs to be
data democracy. We can't be like, "Oh,
well, there's one place where you can
get rankings from 10 years ago." That's
ridiculous. That needs to be available
to everyone in this space. And
everything that we're going to build is
going to be feature complete. Meaning
that
you need to come with the skill set to
do these things. You can't just be like,
"Well, I'm a content SEO." Nah, you need
to know how to do this. And finally, the
whole thing needs to be communitydriven.
It can't just be me telling you like
here's what it is. There are so many
smart, capable people in this space. A
lot of them are going to be speaking
here. And there's so many good ideas
that we need to collect and pressure
test and define what it is that we do.
So, we're going to be launching
relevance engineering.org with all these
frameworks. Again, communitydriven,
open-source, lots of tools that you can
all use. And here are some of the
current projects. So one I'd started a
while ago the gateway specification so
that we can have data portability across
all these different tools. It's so
ridiculous that I'm I'm locked into
whatever you know uh enterprise crawling
tool there is because they have a very
specific data model that I can't take to
someone else. And so we need to have a
standard that they all need to adhere
to. Another thing that we're working on
because I think it's preposterous that
we have these link indices with these
metrics that are effectively
entertainment metrics is and then also
not having a vector database of the web.
So we're building a a distributed
peer-to-peer system so that we can
vectorize the web and then everyone can
have that data. We also have the search
telemetry project which is an output of
all the things that um you know we learn
from all these leaks so that we can get
as many of the data points that Google
is actually using to then have in our
data so we can be like okay it looks
like it might be this let's do
correlations and then finally the open
search initiative I want everyone to
have access to all the rankings data all
the link data that's out there none of
these tools have something that isn't
public. So, we should make that
available to everyone.
So, I would love for y'all to get
involved because we got to do this
together. This can't just be me telling
you what to do. All right. Relevance
engineering for AI overviews. So, I'm so
frustrated looking at all the content
about AI overviews because it's so
wrong. And I literally told you guys
what to do two years ago.
And
so I'm just going to tell you everything
I know and then you can do with it what
you will. Here's my strategic approach
to AI overviews. One, you got to assess
the impact. Are you actually being
impacted? So basically, what keywords
were driving traffic for you that now
have AI overviews? And then what's the
delta on the performance of those
keywords? And then you need to look at
this two ways. There's the performance
aspect, again, continuing to drive
traffic if that's what you want to do.
Okay. Okay, well then we need to think
about going further down the funnel on
the keywords and focusing on those. But
if you want to engineer for branding,
well then we want to get you into the AI
overviews and then just measure your
improvements and continue to engineer
from there. So as we know about 20% of
all queries based on data from zip tie
are showing AI overviews. It differs
across different spaces health space
like 66% so on and so forth. And all of
this is governed by a concept called
retrieval augmented generation. This is
basically when you combine a search
engine with a large language model. And
the way this works is they are
decomposing your pages in an additional
way to what we've historically known in
the SEO space, right? Like we know like
okay they tokenize them and put it into
the index. Now they are generating
vector embeddings not just on a page
level but on a chunk level. So passages
and they're storing those and then a
search happens and those passages are
then fed to the large language model to
generate the response. So there's many
ways to do this chunking breaking things
down into passages. For Google, they are
doing this on a semantic basis, meaning
that they are understanding the logical
uh boundaries within your copy. And
they're able to say, cool, this is a
logical boundary, index that, this is a
logical boundary, index that. And so the
way all this works effectively, they're
like, okay, query comes in. Do we want
to go to the training data and then give
a response based on that? Uh, training
data isn't good enough. Cool. Go out and
give me a bunch of documents and then
let's feed those to the large language
model.
There's a patent that they published
about this that tells you very
specifically what they do and they have
their prompts in there. They're very
simple. One of which is summarize
content ABC and D. That's it. Another
one is uh in context of this query,
summarize this content. Another one is
assuming the user is familiar with this
concept
um you know answer this query. very
simple things that you can plug into
whatever you're using to see what might
be generated. And they also talk about
using not just the query, the documents
from the query that you put in. They
look at related queries and implied
queries. So that's a lot of times why
you're seeing like, oh, this doesn't
even rank for this query, but it's in
the citation.
And so when you think about this, they
they have this concept that they call
query fan out where they're basically
going out to figure out like what are
these other queries.
You also need to understand what those
queries might be and see, hey, how do I
rank there, too? So, it's not just about
your core query. And as far as
structured data, and I know there's been
a lot of wrong conversation about this
in the SEO space, structured data does
come into play here. It's not that it's
being trained on the structured data,
but the structured data can be ingested
during the rag pipeline. and Crystal
Carter, who's going to be speaking on
DeepSeek later or on Thursday, proved
this, which was great because I didn't
want to argue with y'all.
So,
so here's an example of what this looks
like. Obviously, the AI overview has
evolved a lot since the screenshot, but
you know, you've got your citations and
when you click on your citation, it
takes you to the passages that Google
used for that AI overview. These can be
extracted. This is a scroll a text
fragment also known as fraggles as uh
Cindy has named them. And you can get
these but again our SEO software is not
giving you these. So what I've done is
I've just grabbed all the um the
citations here all the copy all the
fraggles and then I did some you know
basically some cosine similarity
analysis and noted that effectively the
higher the relevance the higher you
appear in these AI overviews. There's a
whole paper about this and this is why
people are calling it generative engine
optimization I would imagine and it's
probably my fault because I was one of
the first to show this paper. But what
they did here is they tried a whole
bunch of different things in perplexity
to see what was going to actually make a
difference for ranking. And so they
tried all the things they did like you
know the keyword stuffing all your
typical SEO things. But what they found
is that um you know citing sources,
being more authoritative in how you
speak and also having statistics are the
things that you that get you in there
most. So let's get a lot more specific
about how you actually do that. There's
this concept of what are called semantic
triples. This is how content is
basically understood and data is
extracted from uh a given page. So in
the same way that you're you're uh
structured data you're saying this thing
is this you can do that within text and
so you have the relationships of the
subject predicate object in your content
and then you can pull those out. So what
you want to do is one structure your
content in clear semantic units meaning
you want to have a heading that's clear
and then you want to have a couple
sentences that communicate that idea
very quick very clearly. You don't want
to say something like, oh, something
like, you know, a big block of text when
instead you can just be like, here is
the answer right here. And you also want
to be very precise in how you're using
this language. So rather than saying SEO
helps businesses get more traffic, you
want to say SEO increases organic
traffic for businesses. That is easier
for a a search engine to understand and
extract. And then you also want to have
highly specific or exclusive insights.
So rather than saying, you know, SEO
helps businesses get more traffic, you
want to say our analysis of 1 million
search queries show the pages blah blah
so on and so forth. So having those
stats in there in a very clear way
allows them to extract that content
easily and avoid ambiguity. Don't say
something like they improve performance.
Say our SEO strategies improve the
average organic search rankings by 15%
within six months. which is just
generally better for you to be doing
anyway, right? So, what we've built is
this AI overview simulator
using the same technology that Google
does using their prompts and so on. You
can basically plug in your page or your
copy and the query and it'll give you
recommendations on how to improve it so
you can get into the AI overviews.
That's free. That's yours. How it works?
It uses a a framework called Llama Index
for the rag pipeline. uses Gemini 2.5 so
that we can replicate how Google might
see it and also vertex embeddings which
are Google's um own embedding technology
and finally we also use the SER API so
that you can have it compare against
what else ranks for your queries as well
that's not SEO that's relevance
engineering
closing statements
it's not just SEO do not minimize this
moment this is our opportunity to be
better, to be more effective, frankly,
to make more money. And the future of
search requires us to be intentional
in order to run the show, not just be
the show. That's all I got.
[Music]